
# The Components of Wuḍū

## Al-Nīyyah (Intention)

This is the firm resolve of the heart to perform _wuḍū_ in obedience to the
order of Allāh !swt and His Emissary BPBUH. Ibn Taymīyyah !r[him] said in
_Majmūʿah al-Rasāʾil al-Kubrā_ (1/243): “The place of the _niyyah_ is the
heart and not the tongue in all forms of _ʿibādah_---and that is agreed upon
by all the Muslim scholars---Purification, _Ṣalāh_, _Zakāt_, _Ṣawm_, _Ḥajj_,
_ʿItq_ (freeing of slaves), _Jihād_, etc. If he were to express with his
tongue other than that which he intended in his heart---then what he intended
is counted, not what he said. If he voiced the intention with his tongue and
the intention was not in his heart, that will not count---by total agreement
of all the scholars of Islam---so the _niyyah_ is the firm intention and
resolve itself.”

20. As the Emissary of Allāh BPBUH himself explained in the _ḥadīth_ narrated by
ʿUmar !p[him] in the _Ṣaḥīḥayn_, “Verily the actions are by intention and
there is for everyone only what he intended...”[^21]

## Al-Tasmīyyah (Mentioning Allāh's Name)

21. Abū Hurayrah !p[him] said that the Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said “There is
no _wuḍū_ for him who does not mention Allāh's name upon it.”[^22]

    Imam Aḥmad in one of his two sayings is of the opinion that it is
    obligatory in _wuḍū_, _ghusl_, and _tayammum_. He was followed in this
    opinion by Abū Bakr, and it is the saying of al-Ḥasan al-Baṣrī and Imam
    Isḥāq---as reported by Ibn Qudāmah in _al-Mughnī_ (1/84), and their proof
    is this _ḥadīth_.

    Ibn Qudāmah adds in _al-Mughnī_: If we take the saying that it is
    obligatory,then the _wuḍū_ of one who deliberately leaves it is not
    correct as he has left an obligatory duty in Purification---just as if he
    had left the intention; and if he left it forgetfully then his
    purification is correct. And this is the saying that we regard as being
    correct.

    As for Ibn Taymiyyah !r[him], he held it to be obligatory if the related
    _ḥadīth_ was authentic---as occurs in his _Kitāb al-Īmān_---and the
    _ḥadīth_ is authentic, so therefore his opinion is that it is obligatory.

22. Al-Bukhārī and Muslim report from Anas !p[him] that some of the
Companions of the Prophet BPBUH sought water for _wuḍū_, so the Emissary of
Allāh BPBUH said “Does any of you have water?” So he put his hand into the
water and said “Make _wuḍū_ in the name of Allāh.” And I saw the water coming
out from between his fingers until they all made _wuḍū_.

    Thābit said: “I said to Anas !p[him], ‘How many were
    there?’ He said, ‘About seventy.’”[^23]

    As for the proof for that which we have stated---it is his BPBUH
    saying “Make _wuḍū_ in the name of Allāh.” As for those who say that
    it is only _sunnah muʾakkadah_, then they base that upon the relative
    _ḥadīth_ being weak. However since the _ḥadīth_ is _ṣaḥīḥ_ as we have
    explained, then there remains no proof for them and the proof is with
    us, and Allāh Knows Best.

So it is therefore obligatory as we have shown, however the one who
forgets should mention Allāh's name when he remembers.

## Washing The Hands

23. Humrān !p[him] narrates that ʿUthmān called for water to make _wuḍū_ and
washed his hands three times... then said, “I saw the Emissary of Allāh BPBUH
make _wuḍū_ just as I have made _wuḍū_.”[^24]

24. Abū Hurayrah !p[him] said: the Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said, “When one of
you awakes from sleep then let him not enter his hand into the bowl/vessel
until he washes it three times as he does not know where his hand has spent
the night.”[^25]

25. And in the _ḥadīth_ of ʿAbd Allāh ibn Zayd !p[him] he was asked about the
_wuḍū_ of the Prophet BPBUH, so he called for a bowl of water and made _wuḍū_
from it as the Prophet BPBUH made _wuḍū_, and he poured out water from the
bowl upon his hand and washed it three times.[^26]

26. Aws ibn Abī Aws reports from his grandfather !p[him] said: I saw the
Emissary of Allāh BPBUH make _wuḍū_ washing his hands three times. [Aḥmad
(4/9) and al-Nasāʾī (1/55) with _ṣaḥīḥ_ _isnād_].

## Al-Maḍmaḍah and al-Istinshāq

_Al-Maḍmaḍah_: Washing the mouth and moving the water around within it.

_Al-Istinshāq_: Taking water into the nose and breathing it into its backmost part.

_Al-Istinthār_: Expulsion of water from the nose after _istinshāq_.

## Washing the Mouth and Nose Together with One Handful (of Water)

27. ʿAbd Allāh ibn Zayd al-Anṣārī said that it was said to him: Perform for us
the _wuḍū_ of the Emissary of Allāh BPBUH, so he called for a pot of
water...until he said, “So he washed his mouth and nose with a single handful
and did that three times.”

## Washing the Mouth

28. In the _ḥadīth_ of ʿAmr ibn Yaḥyā !p[him] he said: And he washed his
mouth and nose using three handfuls of water.[^28]

    Imam al-Nawawī says, “...and in this _ḥadīth_ is a clear proof for the
    correct opinion that the Sunnah in washing the mouth and nose is that it
    should be with three handfuls of water---washing the mouth and nose
    [together] with each of them.”

29. In the _ḥadīth_ of ʿĀʾishah !p[her] in which she describes the _wuḍū_ of
the Prophet BPBUH that he said “When you make _wuḍū_ then wash your
mouth.”[^29]

## Washing the Nose and Expelling the Water

30. Abū Hurayrah !p[him] narrates that the Prophet BPBUH said “When one of
you makes _wuḍū_ then let him enter water into his nose, then expel it.”[^30]

31. Exerting in sniffing in the water as long as you are not fasting is
reported in the _ḥadīth_ of Laqīt !p[him] who said, “O Emissary of Allāh
BPBUH, inform me of the _wuḍū_.” He said “Complete the _wuḍū_ and rub between
the fingers and exert in breathing in the water into the nose unless you are
fasting.”[^31]

It is clear from these two _aḥādīth_ that washing the mouth and nose are both
obligatory (_wājib_). Ibn Qudāmah says in _al-Mughnī_, “ Washing the nose and
washing the mouth are both obligatory in both forms of purification---_ghusl_
and _wuḍū_---as washing the face is obligatory in both of them in the
established view of the _madhhab_; and it is the saying of Ibn al-Mubārak, Ibn
Abī Laylā and Isḥāq, and was also reported from ʿAtā.”

## Taking Water Into The Nose With The Right Hand And Expelling It With The Left

ʿAbd Khayr said: We were sitting, looking towards ʿAlī as he made _wuḍū_, and
he entered into his mouth a handful of water with his right hand and washed
his mouth and nose, then expelled it from his nose with his left hand—he did
that three times, then said: Whoever would like to see the way of purification
of the Emissary of Allāh BPBUH, then this is his purification.[^32]

## Washing The Face

The face (_wajh_) is determined as being everything between the beginning of
the hair down to the cheeks and the chin, and up to the start of the ears
including that which is between the beard and ear.

Allāh !swt says,

> O Ye who believe! When ye prepare for prayer, wash your faces, and your
hands (and arms) to the elbows; rub your heads (with water); and (wash) your
feet to the ankles. [Sūrah al-Māʾidah, 5:7]

Humrān ibn Abān narrates that ʿUthmān !p[him] called for water to make
_wuḍū_ and so mentioned the way in which the Prophet BPBUH made _wuḍū_. Humrān
said: Then he washed his face three times.[^33]

## Running Water Through The Beard With The Fingers

32. ʿUthmān !p[him] narrates that the Prophet BPBUH used to run his (wet
fingers) through his beard.[^34]

33. Anas !p[him] narrates that when the Prophet BPBUH made _wuḍū_, he used to
take a handful of water and enter it below his chin and rub it through his
beard and said, “This is what my Lord—the Great and Exalted—has ordered me to
do.”[^35]

    Some of the scholars have declared that entering water through the beard
    is obligatory and say: If he deliberately leaves it—then he  must repeat
    the (_wuḍū_ and) prayer. And this is the saying of Imam Isḥāq and Abū
    Thawr.

    Most of the scholars however are of the opinion that the order is an order
    of desirability (_istihbāb_) and it is not obligatory—and that it is
    clearer that that which is obligatory is moving water through that part of
    the beard...so that it reaches the skin underneath.[^36]

    Imams Aḥmad and Layth and most of the scholars hold that moving water
    through the beard is obligatory when taking _ghusl_ from _Janābah_—and not
    obligatory in _wuḍū_.[^37]

## Washing The Arms Including The Elbows

[Note]{.smallcaps}: The arms here which we are ordered to wash begin with the
fingertips and hands—which are to be included in this washing—they being part
of the arm (_yad_) which we are ordered to wash in the _āyah_.

Allāh !swt says:

> O Ye who believe! When ye prepare for prayer, wash your faces, and your
hands (and arms) to the elbows; rub your heads (with water); and (wash) your
feet to the ankles. [Sūrah al-Māʾidah, 5:7]

Humrān ibn Abān reports that ʿUthmān !p[him] called for water for _wuḍū_ and
mentioned the Prophet's BPBUH way of making _wuḍū_—and Humrān said: Then he
washed his right arm including the elbow three times, then the left in the
same way (al-Bukhārī and Muslim as has preceded).

Regarding inclusion of the elbows in the washing of the arms—scholars have
differed: Some of them saying that they must be included in this washing, and
others saying that this is not so. And this difference of opinion is due to
their disagreement over the meaning of the word _ilā_ (to) in the _āyah_ -
does it mean ‘up to/until’ or ‘up to and including’?

He who says that it means ‘up to’ does not include the elbows in the
washing—just as Allāh !swt says:

> ...thumma 'atimmus-siyaama ilaa -llail: Then complete your fast till the
night appears; [Sūrah al-Baqarah, 2:187]

And this is the opinion of some of the companions of Imam Mālik.

Most scholars, however, hold the view that the meaning is ‘up to and
including/along with’—and thus include the elbows in the washing and use as
their evidence Allāh's !swt saying:

>...wa yayazidkum quwwatan ilaa quwwatikum...(and add strength to your
strength); [Sūrah Hūd, 11:52]

34. The proof in this matter is the _ḥadīth_ of Nuʿaym bin Mijmar who said, “I
saw Abū Hurayrah make _wuḍū_—he washed his face and completed the _wuḍū_, then
washed his right hand until he reached the upper arm, then his left hand till
he reached the upper arm”— then in the end of the _ḥadīth_ he said: “This is
how I saw the Emissary of Allāh BPBUH make _wuḍū_.” (Muslim, 1/246)

    So, dear reader, it is clear from this _ḥadīth_ that the Prophet BPBUH used
    to wash the elbows further, he used to increase upon that and wash part of
    the upper arm.

35. Jābir !p[him] said that when the Prophet BPBUH made _wuḍū_, he would pass
the water over his elbows. (Reported by al-Dāraquṭnī (1/15), al-Bayhaqī (1/56)
and others; Ibn Ḥajr declared it _ḥasan_; Shaykh al-Albānī declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_
(_Ṣaḥīḥ ul-Jāmiʿ_, 4547).

## Wiping the Head and Ears and Imāmah

Wiping over all of the head as Allāh BPBUH says:

> ...wamsahoo bi ru'oosikum...: ...rub your heads (with water)
[Soorat-ul-Maa'idah 5:7]

<!-- TODO Add arabic separators -->

Ibn Qudāmah says: Some of the people who claim that that which is ordered
to be wiped is part of the head only claim that the _Bā_ (in the _āyah_)
means “part of” as if He had said, “Wipe part of your heads.” However, we
say that in His !swt saying wamsahoo bi ru'oosikum the _Bā_ is as if He
!swt said regarding Tayammum wamsahoo bi wujoohikum (Allāh !swt orders us
to wipe the faces).

Therefore their saying that the _Bā_ means “part of” is incorrect and
unknown to the scholars of the language. Ibn Burhān says, “He who claims
that the _bā_ means ‘part of’ has declared before the scholars of the
language that of which they have no knowledge.” (_al-Mughnī_ 1/112)

Imam al-Shawkānī says, “It is not established that it means _part of_ and
Sībawayh (one of the foremost scholars of the Arabic language) has denied
that in fifteen places in his book.” (_Nayl al-Awtār_, 1/193).

36. In the _ḥadīth_ of ʿAbd Allāh ibn Zayd !p[him] is further proof of the
incorrectness of the saying that it means “a part of”—in that the Prophet
BPBUH wiped his head with his two hands, moving them forwards and
backwards—beginning with the front of the head and (wiping) with them up
to his nape then he BPBUH returned them to the place from which he began
(al-Fatḥ 1/251, Muslim #235, al-Tirmidhī #28 and others).

Wiping the ears: The ruling for the ears is the same as that for the
head.

37. It is authentically reported that the Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said, “The
two ears are a part of the head.” (Reported by al-Tirmidhī (#37), Abū Dāwūd
(#134), and Ibn Mājah (#444). It was declared _ṣaḥīḥ_ by Shaykh al-Albānī
[_al-Ṣaḥīḥah-_, 1/36]. Imam Aḥmad was of the view that wiping the ears has the
same ruling as that for wiping the head.)

As for those who hold the view that it is a _sunnah_, they do not have any
evidence except their regarding this _ḥadīth_ as being _ḍaʿīf_. However, it is
authentic due to a chain of narration which they did not come across and so
the proof is with our saying and Allāh Knows best.

The scholars who hold that they are part of the head are Ibn al-Musayyib,
ʿAṭā, al-Ḥasan, Ibn Sīrīn, Saʿīd ibn Jubayr and al-Nakhaʾī and it is the
saying of al-Thawrī and Ahl al-Raʾy and Imams Mālik and Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal.

## Taking Fresh Water for the Head and Ears

38. Shaykh al-Albānī says in _al-Ḍaʿīfah_, #995: There is not to be found in
the Sunnah anything which obligates taking fresh water for the ears—therefore
he should wipe them along with the water for the head—just as it is also
permissible to wipe the head with the water remaining from that of the arms
after washing them according to the _ḥadīth_ of al-Rabīʿ bint Muʿawwiḍ that
the Prophet BPBUH “wiped his head with water remaining in his hand.” (Reported
by Abū Dāwūd and others with _ḥasan isnād_)

## The Way of Wiping

39. From ʿAbd Allāh ibn ʿAmr—about the way of performing _wuḍū_—he said: Then
he BPBUH wiped his head and entered his two forefingers into his ears and
wiped the backs of his ears with his thumbs (Reported by Abū Dāwūd #135,
al-Nasāʾī #140, Ibn Mājah #422 and authenticated by Ibn Khuzaymah).

## Wiping over the Imāmah only

40. ʿAmr bin Umayyah !p[him] said: I saw the Emissary of Allāh BPBUH wipe
over his turban and leather socks. (Reported by al-Bukhārī [_al-Fatḥ_, 1/266]
and others)

41. Bilāl !p[him] reports that the Prophet BPBUH wiped over the leather
socks and the head cover (Reported by Muslim 1/159).

## Wiping over the turban and forelock

42. Al-Mughīrah bin Shuʿbah !p[him] reports that the Prophet BPBUH made
_wuḍū_ and wiped over his forelock and over the turban and leather socks
(Reported by Muslim 1/159).

Ibn Qudāmah says in _al-Mughnī_ (1/310); And if part of the head is uncovered
and it is normally so, then it is preferable to wipe over that along with the
turban - that is recorded from Aḥmad: as the Prophet BPBUH wiped over his
turban and forelock, as occurs in the _ḥadīth_ of al-Mugheerah ibn Shu'bah.

As for caps/‘prayer hats,’ it is not permissible to wipe over them---as Imam
Aḥmad says---for various reasons: (1) They do not cover all of the head
normally, nor are they tied around it. (2) There is no difficulty in their
removal.

As for the woman's head cover, it is permissible to wipe over it as Umm
Salamah used to wipe over her head cover. This was reported by Ibn al-Mundhir.
(See_al-Mughnī_, 1/312).

## Washing the Feet and Ankles

Allāh !swt says,

> ...wa arjulakum ilaal ka'bayn...: ...and (wash) your feet to the ankles [Sūrah al-Māʾidah 5:7]

thus ordering the washing of the feet and ankles.

43. Ibn ʿUmar !p[themtwo] said: the Emissary of Allāh BPBUH fell behind us and
then came upon us during a journey, then we found him and it was time for
ʿAṣr, so we began to make _wuḍū_ and wipe over our feet, so he BPBUH called
out at the top of his voice, “Woe to the ankles from the Fire.” (two or three
times) [al-Bukhārī (_al-Fatḥ_, 1/232) and Muslim, 3/128].

    Al-Nawawī says in his explanation of _Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim_ after mentioning the
    _ḥadīth_: (Imam) Muslim's intention !r[him] in quoting these _aḥādīth_ was
    to prove the obligation of washing the feet---and that wiping them is not
    sufficient.

<!-- TODO Check the narrator's name here -->

44. In the _ḥadīth_ of al-Bukhārī and Muslim from Ḥumrān bin Abān that ʿUthmān
!p[him] called for water for _wuḍū_ and then mentioned the _wuḍū_ of the
Prophet BPBUH. Ḥumrān then said: Then he washed his right foot to the ankle
three times and then his left foot to the ankle three times.

45. As Abū Hurayrah !p[him] did in Muslim's narration, “Then he washed his
right foot till he reached the shin, then he washed the left foot till he
reached the shin...” and in the end of the _ḥadīth_ he said, “This is what I
saw the Emissary of Allāh BPBUH” do. [Muslim, 1/246].

    From this _ḥadīth_---O Muslim---it becomes clear that the ankles enter
    into this washing as is clear from his saying “till he reached the shin.”

<!-- TODO Who is al-Mustaurad -->

46. Al-Mustawrad !p[him] said, “When the Prophet BPBUH made _wuḍū_ he would
enter the water between his toes with his little finger.” [Reported by Abū
Dāwūd (#148), al-Tirmidhī (#40), and Ibn Mājah (#446). Declared as _ṣaḥīḥ_ by
al-Albānī].

Al-Ṣanʿānī says in _Subul al-Salām_ after quoting this _ḥadīth_: It is a proof
for the obligation of wiping between the toes---and this also occurs in the
_ḥadīth_ of Ibn 'Abbaas which we have indicated, reported by al-Tirmidhī,
Aḥmad, Ibn Mājah, and al-Ḥākim, and authenticated by al-Bukhārī. And it is
done by using the little finger. (See _Subul al-Salām_, 1/48).

<!-- TODO Check the plural of toes and fingers as well -->

47. And Laqīt bin Ṣabarah said, “The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said, ‘Complete
the _wuḍū_ and wipe between the Aṣābiʿ (fingers and/or toes).’” [Abū Dāwūd
(#142), al-Tirmidhī (#37), al-Nasāʾī (#114), Ibn Mājah (#407), and al-Ḥākim
(1/148). Al-Albānī declared it _ṣaḥīḥ_.] Al-Ṣanʿānī says, “It clearly means
both the fingers and toes and is shown clearly in the _ḥadīth_ of Ibn ʿAbbās.”
[_Subul al-Salām_, 1/47].

## Reply to those who wipe the feet without washing

Wiping the feet when not wearing anything on the foot is not established
from the Prophet BPBUH. As for their using as a proof the _āyah_,

> wamsahoo bi ru'oosikum wa arjulakum ilaal ka'bayn: rub your heads and
your feet to the ankles...[Sūrah al-Māʾidah 5:7]

reading (_arjulikum_) and saying that the feet are thus connected to (the
command to wipe) the heads; this is not correct, rather they are connected to
(the order to wash) the hands. As for the reading of the word (_arjulikum_)
with Kasrah of the lām, al-Ṣanʿānī says that is for wiping over leather socks
---as is shown by the Sunnah---and this is the best interpretation for this
particular recital. (_Subul al-Salām_, 1/58).

<!-- TODO Pillar doesn't make sense here -->

The Quran is not to be explained according to the human intellect---especially
in the matters of worship such as Ṣalāh, _wuḍū_, etc.---but by the Sunnah
which explains this Pillar. And there are many such examples in the Qur'an
which the Prophet BPBUH explained by his sayings---and from this is the
washing of the feet---and its proof from the Sunnah has preceded.

If they wish to use the intellect then we say to them: The bottom of the foot
has more right to be wiped than the surface (their saying being the wiping of
the surface), and if they say: Then what about the socks? we say: That is
established from the Prophet BPBUH just as washing the foot is also
established in the Sunnah.

Leaving out one of two verbs and sufficing with one of them, as the Arabs,
when two verbs come together having similar meaning and are followed by things
related to them, makes it permissible to mention only one of the two verbs and
attaching those things relating to the second to those relating to the first
which is mentioned - according to what the wording demands, until it is as if
the two are partners with regard to the verb, as the poet said: I fed it with
hay and cold water. And what is meant is: I fed it with hay and gave it cold
water to drink.

<!-- TODO Add short biography of al-Zajjāj -->

The saying of al-Zajjāj (a great scholar of the Arabic language): It is
permissible that the wording (_arjulikum_) has the meaning of _wash the feet_
as the wording (_ilā al-Kaʿbayn_) conveys that meaning---as the mentioning of
a limit suggests washing just as Allāh !swt says _ilā al-Marāfiq_ [that is the
limit of the elbows is for washing] however, if wiping were intended then
there would be no need for mention of a limit just as Allāh !swt says _wamsahū
bi ruʾūsikum_ not mentioning any limit (for wiping the head) and further the
term wiping can be used to mean washing. (_Al-Mirqāt_, 1/400).

And further, the great majority of scholars have agreed that it is obligatory
to wash the feet and that is reported---and reaches the level of _mutawātir_
from the Prophet BPBUH as al-Ḥāfiẓ Ibn Ḥajr says; and further it is not
established that any of the Ṣaḥābah differed regarding that---except what is
reported from ʿAlī, Ibn ʿAbbās, and Anas !p[them]---and it is established that
they didn't retract from it (_Al-Mirqāt_, 1/400).

48. And Abū Hurayrah !p[him] reports that the Emissary of Allāh BPBUH came
to the graveyard and said .**..they will come on the Day of Judgement with
their blazes shining from the _wuḍū_** (It has preceded, #7). Meaning the the
Emissary of Allāh BPBUH will know from the traces of the washing, as for those
who do not wash then he will not know them on the Day of Judgement.

    Ibn Ḥajr says: And it is established that this shining of the faces, hands
    and feet are particular to the Muslim Ummah.

## The Siwāk (Tooth stick)

The _siwāk_ is that which the mouth is brushed with. And it is also called the
_miswāk_, the plural being: _sūk_. And the _siwāk_ comes from the Arāk tree
and it is a well-known tree. Abū Ḥanīfah said, “It is the best of the trees
whose twigs are used for brushing the teeth...smelling of milk.” Abū Ziyād
said, “From it is taken there tooth-sticks---from its twigs and roots---and
the best part for that is its roots, and it is broadly spreading...” and Ibn
Shamīl said, “The Arāk is a tall fine-shoot green tree with many leaves and
branches, having weak wood and growing in hollows---_miswāk_ is taken from it,
being one of the citrus trees. Its singular is Arāk and its plural Arāʾik
(_Lisān al-ʿArab_, 268).
 
It is _mustaḥabb_ (desirable) to use the _siwāk_ at many different times as is
established from the Prophet BPBUH that he used to use the _siwāk_ at every
Prayer, and before reading the Quran, and before sleeping and when waking, and
when the breath changes---whether fasting or not---or whether at the start of
the day or in the afternoon, and it is a form of worship which is easy
therefore observe it, O my Muslim Brother.

49. And also when making _wuḍū_ , as Abū Hurayrah !p[him] narrates that the
Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said, “If I did not fear to cause hardship to my Ummah
I would have ordered them to use the _siwāk_ with every _wuḍū_.” [Reported by
al-Tirmidhī (#22) who said: _Ḥasan Ṣaḥīḥ_, and Mālik (#123), Aḥmad (4/116),
Abū Dāwūd (#37) and others. Al-Albānī declared it to be _ṣaḥīḥ_ (_Takhrīj
al-Mishkāh_, #390)].

50. And ʿĀʾishah !p[her] narrates that the Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said, “The
_siwāk_ is a means of cleansing the mouth and pleasing the Lord.” [Al-Bukhārī
reports it in _muʿallaq_ form---connected by Aḥmad, al-Nasāʾī, Ibn Khuzaymah
and Ibn Ḥibbān].

## Al-Dalk

_Al-Dalk_, meaning rubbing water over the body parts, is part of the _wuḍū_
authentically reported from the Prophet BPBUH. Al-Mustawrid bin Shadād said,
“I saw the Emissary of Allāh BPBUH when he made _wuḍū_ rubbing his toes with
his litle finger.” (_Ṣaḥīḥ_).

51. ʿAbd Allāh bin Zayd !p[him] narrates that the Prophet BPBUH made _wuḍū_
and said, “Rub in this way.” (See _Nayl al-Awtār_, 4/39).

52. He !p[him] also narrates that the Prophet BPBUH made _wuḍū_ with two
thirds of a _mudd_^[_mudd_: a measure of volume. Approximately what one's two
hands can scoop up] (of water) and rubbed over his forearms. (Ibn Khuzaymah
(#118), and its _isnād_ is _ṣaḥīḥ_---and al-Ḥākim (1/161) reports it by way of
Yaḥyā bin Abī Zāʾidah].

## Performing the _wuḍū_ in the order mentioned in the Āyah

As for what is narrated regarding the _order_ as mentioned in the _āyah_, then
there is nothing to contradict that---and this order is obligatory (_wājib_)
and it is said, _sunnah_. [See _Fiqh al-Imām Saʿīd bin al-Muṣayyib_, 1/64].

As for what is related with regard to the Prophet's _wuḍū_BPBUH then it has
been reported sometimes out of the regular order. And the proof is:

53. Al-Miqdām bin Maʿd Yakrib said, “I came to the Prophet BPBUH with water
for _wuḍū_, so he washed his hands three times, then washed his face three
times, then washed his forearms three times, then washed his mouth and nose
three times, then wiped his head and ears---their outsides and insides---and
washed each of his feet three times.” [Aḥmad (4/132), Abū Dāwūd (1/19) with a
_ṣaḥīḥ isnād_. Al-Shawkānī (1/1\~5) said, “Its _isnād_ is good, and it is
reported by ad-Diyaa in _al-Mukhtārah_.” Shaykh al-Albānī recorded it in
_al-Ṣaḥīḥah_, #261]

    So this is a proof that he BPBUH did not always stick to the regular order---
    and this is a proof that it is not obligatory---however, his sticking to it
    mostly shows that it is Sunnah. And Allāh Knows best.

Al-Suyūṭī says, as is reported from him in _ʿAwn al-Maʿbūd_ (1/48), “It is
used as a proof (i.e. the aforementioned _ḥadīth_) by him who says that
sticking to the regular order in _wuḍū_ is not obligatory as he washed his
mouth and nose after washing his arms.”

The author of _ʿAwn al-Maʿbūd_ says, “This narration is _shādh_^[_Shādh_ is a
class of narration whose chain is authentic but contradicts that which is
better established.] and should therefore not to be taken in contradiction to
the established narrations which put the washing of the mouth and nose before
the washing of the face.”

I say, “The difference of opinion between the scholars here is with regard to
those parts of _wuḍū_ which are Sunnah. As for the obligatory duties, then
they are according to the order mentioned in the noble _āyah_, and the best
thing is to perform all of the actions in the way mentioned in the majority of
the _aḥādīth_. Allāh Knows best.”

## Al-Mawālāh

_Al-Mawālāh_ refers to washing each part directly after the previous, leaving
no time gap in between.

Nothing other than this is established from the Prophet BPBUH. It is however
established that Ibn ʿUmar !p[themtwo] urinated within the market, then made
_wuḍū_ and so washed his face and hands and wiped his head, then he was called
to pray over a _janāzah_, so he entered the mosque then wiped over his leather
socks, and then prayed over it. [Reported by Mālik (#72) and al-Bayhaqī
(1/84). And ʿAṭāʾ didn't see anything wrong with leaving such gaps whilst
making _wuḍū_ and it is the saying of al-Ḥasan, al-Nakhaʿī and the better
reported of the two sayings of al-Shāfiʿī].

## Beginning with the right

That is washing the right hand before the left and likewise the feet.

54. ʿĀʾishah !p[her] said, “The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH used to like to begin
with the right in putting on shoes, combing his hair, in purification and in
all of his affairs.” [Al-Bukhārī (_al-Fatḥ_) 1/235, Muslim (#267), and
others].

55. Abū Hurayrah !p[him] narrates that the Prophet BPBUH said, “When you dress
and when you make _wuḍū_, then begin with the right.” [Abū Dāwūd (#4141),
al-Tirmidhī (1766), and al-Nasāʾī (402). Shaykh al-Albānī declared it
_ṣaḥīḥ_].

## Economizing the use of water and not being wasteful

56. Anas !p[him] said, “The Prophet BPBUH used to make _wuḍū_ with a _mudd_
(of water) and make _ghusl_ with a _ṣāʿ_ or up to five _mudds_.” [Muslim (1/156)
and others]. A _ṣāʿ_ is equal to four _mudds_.

If you consider this _ḥadīth_ well, O my Muslim Brother, you would feel
ashamed of what some people do these days. One of them opening the water tap
and making _wuḍū_ and sometimes talking to his companion whilst the water is
running out---what an excess in wastefulness! So he who does that should fear
Allāh and remember this _ḥadīth_ and keep it in mind and follow the Sunnah
with regard to using the water sparingly and not being wasteful---and here the
true following of the Prophet BPBUH is made clear and the true Muslim's
belief. It is from the Sunnah for the Muslim who wishes to make _wuḍū_ to have
with him a container large enough for a _mudd_ of water---in order to force
himself to return to the following of the Sunnah.

## The supplication after wuḍū

57. ʿUmar bin al-Khaṭṭāb !p[him] said, “The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said, ‘None of you makes _wuḍū_ and completes the _wuḍū_ then says:

<!-- TODO Add Arabic -->

(_Trans._ I bear witness that none has the right to be worshipped except
Allāh, and that Muḥammad is His slave and Messenger) except that all eight
Gates of Paradise are opened for him---so that he enters by whichever he
pleases.’” [Reported by Muslim (#234), Abū Dāwūd (#169), al-Tirmidhī (#55),
al-Nasāʾī (#148), and Ibn Mājah (#470)].

And al-Tirmidhī adds an authentic addition to it:

<!-- TODO Add Arabic -->

(_Trans._ O Allāh, make me one of those who constantly repents to You and of
those who purify themselves.) [Declared as _ṣaḥīḥ_ by al-Albānī].

58. Abū Saʿīd al-Khudrī !p[him] said, “The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said,

‘Whoever makes _wuḍū_ then says upon finishing the _wuḍū_,

<!-- TODO Add Arabic -->

(_Trans._ I declare You free from all defects my Lord and all praise belongs
to you and I bear witness that there is none worthy of worship except You. I
seek Your forgiveness and I turn to You), it is written in a parchment, then
sealed and is not opened till Judgement Day.” [Reported by Ibn al-Sunnī in
_ʿAmal al-Yawn wa al-Laylah_, #30. Declared as _ṣaḥīḥ_ by al-Albānī].

## Washing each body part once

59. Ibn ʿAbbās !p[him] said, “The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH made _wuḍū_ (washing each part) once.” [al-Bukhārī (_al-Fatḥ_) 1/226].

## Washing each body part twice

60. ʿAbd Allāh bin Zayd narrates that the Prophet BPBUH made _wuḍū_ (washing each part) twice. [al-Bukhārī (_al-Fatḥ_) 1/226].

## Washing each body part thrice

61. In the _ḥadīth_ of ʿUthmān !p[him] recorded by al-Bukhārī and Muslim, he
BPBUH washed each of the parts three times.

So from these _aḥādīth_ it becomes clear to us that, as is well-known to the
large majority of scholars, washing each body-part once is obligatory---and
the second and third washings are Sunnah---and it is better to do likewise
following the Sunnah of the Prophet BPBUH [_al-Majmūʿ_ of al-Nawawī, 1/229].



## The desirability of making wuḍū for each prayer

Al-Ḥāfiẓ says in _al-Fatḥ_ (1/172) under the question _Making wuḍū without
having broken it_,

62. Anas !p[him] narrated that the Prophet BPBUH used to make _wuḍū_ for every
prayer. He was asked, “What did you (the Ṣaḥābah) use to do?” He replied,
“One _wuḍū_ was sufficient for us till such time as we broke it.”

This _ḥadīth_ is evidence that what is meant generally is the obligatory
prayer.

Al-Ṭaḥāwī says, “It may be that that was obligatory upon him BPBUH
particularly and was later abrogated on the Day of Fatḥ by the _ḥadīth_ of
Buraydah---which Muslim reports---that he BPBUH prayed all the Prayers on the
Day of Fatḥ with one _wuḍū_ and that ʿUmar !p[him] asked him about that so he
BPBUH said, “I did it deliberately.” Or it may be that he BPBUH used to do it
out of desirability only, then feared that it might be thought to be
obligatory, and so left it to show the permissibility of that.” [MISSING
REFERENCE]

I say: The result is that making _wuḍū_ for every Prayer is mustahabb and
praying all of the Prayers with one _wuḍū_ is permissible. And Allāh Knows
best.

## The one who is unsure if he has _wuḍū_ or not relies upon certainty

If he who knows that he has made _wuḍū_ then is not sure that he has broken it
then his _wuḍū_ remains. And he who knows that he has done that which breaks
_wuḍū_ and doubts when he has made _wuḍū_ thereafter, then he does not have
_wuḍū_. In each case he relies upon that which he is certain of before that
which he has doubt about---and he disregards the doubt. And this is the saying
of the great majority of scholars and it is the saying of Abū Ḥanīfah,
al-Shāfiʿī, and Aḥmad. [_Al-Mughnī_ (1/193) and _Fiqh al-Awzāʿī_, 1/56].

63. And the proof for this is what is established from Abū Hurayrah !p[him],
who said, “The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said, ‘If one of you feels something in
his stomach and he isn't sure did anything (wind) come out of it or not---then
let him not leave the mosque until he hears a sound or finds a smell.’”
[Muslim (_Sharḥ al-Nawawī_, 4/51), _ʿĀridah al-Aḥwadhī bi Sharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ
al-Tirmidhī_, 1/79].

So the _ḥadīth_ is a proof that things remain upon their original state until
there is a certainty of a change in that, and doubt does not harm that---so he
who is sure of having made _wuḍū_ and thinks that he may have broken it, then
he remains upon _wuḍū_.

## A man and woman's washing from a single vessel

64. Ibn ʿAbbās !p[themtwo] narrates that one of the wives of the Prophet BPBUH
took a _ghusl_ from _janābah_ then saw the Emissary of Allāh BPBUH about to
take a _ghusl_ from the remaining water, so she informed him that she had made
_ghusl_ therefrom. So, the Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said, “Nothing makes the
water impure.” [Reported by Abū Dāwūd (#67), and al-Nasāʾī (#326), al-Tirmidhī
who declared it to be _hasan ṣaḥīḥ_, and Ibn Mājah (#370)].

Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr says, “There is nothing in the Sharīʿah to prevent each of
them washing with the water remaining from the other---either together or one
after the other, and this is the saying of the scholars of the different lands
and the great majority of scholars---and the _aḥādīth_ about it are _mutawātir_.” (_Al-Istidhkār_, 1/373).

## Drying the body parts after purification

ʿUthmān bin ʿAffān, al-ḥasan bin ʿAlī, Anas ibn Mālik, al-Ḥasan al-Baṣrī, Ibn
Sīrīn, ʿAlqamah, al-Aswad, Masrūq, al-Ḍaḥḥāk, ʿAbd Allāh bin al-Ḥārith, Abū
Yaʿlā, Abū al-Aḥwaṣ, al-Shaʿbī, al-Thawrī, Isḥāq, Ibn ʿUmar in a narration,
and Abū Ḥanīfah, Mālik, Aḥmad, and the Shāfiʿī Madhhab in one saying, all say
that it is permissible after both _wuḍū_ and _ghusl_ to dry the body parts.
And their evidence is what ʿĀʾishah !p[her] reports---she said, “The Emissary
of Allāh BPBUH had a cloth which he used to dry himself with after making
_wuḍū_.” [Reported by al-Tirmidhī who declared it to be _ḍaʿīf_. Then al-ʿAynī
states that al-Nasāʾī records it in _al-Kunā_ with a _ṣaḥīḥ isnād_.  I say:
And it has other narrations which support and strengthen it. (See _Fiqh
al-Imām Saʿīd_, 1/70). Al-Albānī declares the _ḥadīth_ to be _ḥasan_. (_Ṣaḥīḥ
al-Jāmiʿ_, 4706).

66. Salmān al-Fārsī narrates that the Prophet BPBUH made _wuḍū_, then turned
up a woollen cloak he had and wiped his face with it. [Reported by Ibn Mājah
(#468)]. In _al-Zawāʾid_, it is said: Its _isnād_ is _ṣaḥīḥ_. I say: In its
_isnād_ is al-Waḍīn bin ʿAṭāʾ who is _ṣadūq_ but has a bad memory as al-Hāfiẓ
Ibn Ḥajr says in _Taqrīb al-Tahdhīb_, so its _isnād_ is _daʿīf_! But it is
strengthened by the previous _ḥadīth_ of ʿĀʾishah to the level of _ḥasan_. And
Allāh knows best.]

Some others hold it to be _makrūh_ to dry the body parts after
purification and their proof is:

67. What is established from Maymūnah !p[her] who described the Prophet's
BPBUH _ghusl_ from _janābah_ and said, “Then I brought him a cloth but he
refused it.” [Al-Bukhārī and Muslim and the wording is the latter's].

Conclusion: Drying the body parts is one of the desirable actions as shown by
the _ḥadīth_ of ʿĀʾishah !p[her]. As for the saying that it is _makrūh_, then
that is not acceptable as the saying of Maymūnah !p[her], “but he refused it,”
does not amount to the fact that it is _makrūh_---and Allāh knows best.



