

# Introduction

Verily, all praise is for Allāh, we praise Him and seek His aid and ask for His
forgiveness, and we seek refuge with Allāh from the evils of ourselves and our
evil actions. Whomever Allāh guides there is none who can misguide him, and
whomever Allāh misguides there is none who can guide him, and I bear witness
that none has the right to be worshiped except Allāh Alone, having no partner,
and I bear witness that Muḥammad is His slave and His Messenger.

!quran()
(O mankind! Revere your Guardian-Lord, Who created you from a single person,
created, of like nature, his mate, and from them twain scattered countless men
and women; revere Allāh, through Whom you demand your mutual (rights) and
(revere) the wombs (that bore you): for Allāh ever watches over you.)
(al-Nisā, Q4:1)

!quran()
(O you who believe! Fear Allāh as He should be feared, and die not except in a
state of Islam.)
(Āl ʿImrān, Q3:102)

!quran()
(O you who have believed, fear Allāh and speak words of appropriate justice. He
will [then] amend for you your deeds and forgive you your sins. And whoever
obeys Allāh and His Messenger has certainly attained a great attainment.)
(al-Aḥzāb, Q33:70--71)

As for what follows: Verily the most truthful speech is the Word of Allāh and
the best guidance is the guidance of Muḥammad BPBUH, and the worst of affairs
are the novelties and every novelty is an innovation and every innovation is a
going astray and every going astray is in the Fire.

I desired to write this as a completion for the treatises which are in
circulation amongst the people today---about the different fields---especially
of worship such as prayer and fasting, etc. which have made easier that which is
difficult with regard to religious rulings and being guided thereby, as it maybe
difficult these days for some to read, research, and extract these rulings from
their places within the source books, either because of the ignorance of the
Muslims, laziness, or some other worldly problems. I sincerely advise all the
Muslims to read and research until they come to know and understand their true
_Dīn_.

I wished to write this in order to complete the series of the types of worship,
especially since no one has particularized this topic in a treatise---except
what occurs within the books of reference as we have explained---but I have not
found this in the form of a treatise.

My method for this treatise has been not to quote except what is authentic from
the _ḥadīth_ of the Messenger of Allāh BPBUH---if Allāh wishes---ordering it
according to the order of the _wuḍū_ of the Messenger of Allāh BPBUH, and I have
commented on some of the points about which there is difference of opinion,
stating that which is correct therefrom in our view after replying to the other
opinions.

I ask Allāh to guide us to that which is proper. Verily He is the One having
authority over that and having the Power to do so.

[Shaykh Fahd ʿAbd al-Raḥmān al-Shuwayb]{.smallcaps}

## The Definition of Wuḍū

Linguistically, _wuḍū_ is the action, and _waḍū_ the water used therefore---and
it is also a verbal noun; or they are two forms of the same word, both meaning
the verbal noun and maybe both referring also to the water used.

According to Sharīʿah, _wuḍū_ is using clean and cleansing (_ṭahūr_) water upon
certain body parts as Allāh has prescribed and explained.

## The Prescription of Wuḍū in the Quran and Sunnah

Allāh !swt says,

!quran()
(O Ye who believe! When ye prepare for prayer, wash your faces, and your hands
(and arms) to the elbows; rub your heads (with water); and (wash) your feet to
the ankles.)
(al-Māʾidah, Q5:7)

1. Abū Hurayrah BP_HIM said: The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said,

    [«لَا تُقْبَلُ صَلَاةُ أَحَدِكُمْ إِذَا أَحْدَثَ حَتَّىٰ يَتَوَضَّأَ»]
    {lang=ar}

    “The _ṣalāh_ of anyone of you breaching purification is not accepted unless
    he makes _wuḍū_.”[^1]

2. Ibn ʿUmar BP_TWO said: Indeed, I heard the Emissary of Allāh BPBUH say,

    [«لَا يَقْبَلُ اللهُ صَلَاةً بِغَيْرِ طَهُورٍ وَلَا صَدَقَةً مِنْ غَلُولٍ»]
    {lang=ar}

    “Allāh does not accept _ṣalāh_ without purification, nor _ṣadaqah_ from
    illegally attained wealth.”[^2]

3. Ibn ʿAbbās BP_TWO said: The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said,

    [«إِنَّمَا أُمِرْتُ بِالوُضُوءِ إِذَا قُمْتُ إِلَىٰ الصَّلَاةِ»]{lang=ar}

    “Verily I have been ordered to make _wuḍū_ when I stand for _ṣalāh_.”[^3]

4. Abū Saʿīd BP_HIM said: The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said,

    [«مِفْتَاحُ الصَّلَاةِ الطَّهُورُ، وَتَحْرِيمُهَا التَّكْبِيرُ، وَتَحْلِيلُهَا التَّسْلِيمُ»]{lang=ar}

    “The key to _ṣalāh_ is purification, its _taḥrīm_[^4] is the _takbīr_[^4-1]
    and its _taḥlīl_[^5] is the giving of _salām_.”[^6]

## The Excellence of Wuḍū

5. Abū Hurayrah BP_HIM said: The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said,

    [«أَلَا أَدُلُّكُمْ عَلَىٰ مَا يَمْحُو اللهُ بِهِ الخَطَايَا وَيَرْفَعُ بِهِ
    الدَّرَجَاتِ؟» قَالُوا: بَلَىٰ يَا رَسُولَ اللهِ! قَالَ «إِسْبَاغُ الوُضُوءِ
    عَلَىٰ المَكَارِهِ، وَكَثْرَةُ الخُطَا إِلَىٰ المَسَاجِدِ، وَانْتِظَارُ
    الصَّلَاةِ بَعْدَ الصَّلَاةِ، فَذٰلِكُمُ الرِّبَاطُ، فَذٰلِكُمُ الرِّبَاطُ،
    فَذٰلِكُمُ الرِّبَاطُ»]{lang=ar}

    “Shall I not guide you to that by which Allāh wipes away the sins and raises
    the ranks?” They said, “Certainly O Emissary of Allāh!” He BPBUH said,
    “Completing the _wuḍū_ when it is a hardship, many steps to the mosques, and
    waiting for the [next] prayer after the prayer, that is _al-Ribāṭ_
    (defending the frontiers); that is _al-Ribāṭ_; that is _al-Ribāṭ_.”[^7]

6. Abū Hurayrah BP_HIM reports that Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said, “When the
   Muslim (or 'Believing') servant makes _wuḍū_ and washes his face then the sin
   of everything he looked at with his eye comes away with the water, or with
   the last drop of the water, and when he washes his hands then the sin of
   everything he stretched out his hands to comes away with the water, or with
   the last drop of the water. And when he washes his feet every sin which his
   feet walked towards comes away with the water or with the last drop of the
   water---so that he leaves clean (clear/pure) from sins.”[^8]

7. Abū Hurayrah BP_HIM reports that Emissary of Allāh BPBUH came to the
   graveyard and said, “Peace be upon you, dwelling of Believing People and we
   will (all) if Allāh wills join you soon. I would have liked to have seen our
   brothers!” They said, “Are we not your brothers, O Emissary of Allāh?” He
   BPBUH said, “You are my Companions and our brothers are those who have not
   yet come!” They said, “How will you know those who have not yet come from
   your _Ummah_, O Emissary of Allāh?” He said, “Have you not seen that if a man
   had a horse with a white blaze and hoof along with a totally jet-black horse,
   then would he not know his horse?” They said, “Certainly, O Emissary of
   Allāh.” He said, “So they will come with white blazes and marks from the
   _wuḍū_ and I am present before them at the Hand (_water-tank_). Indeed men
   will be driven away from my _water-tank_ as the lost camel is driven away
   from their gathering place. ‘Come on.’ So it will be said: ‘Indeed they have
   made changes after you,’ so I will say, ‘Be off, be off.’”[^9]

8. Abū Umāmah BP_HIM said: The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said, “When a Muslim
   makes _wuḍū_ the sins he has committed come away from his hearing and from
   his sight and from his hand and from his feet, so when he sits he sits down
   having been forgiven.”[^10]

9. Abū Mālik al-Ashʿarī BP_HIM said: The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said,
   “Purification is half of Īmān; and _alḥamdulillāh_ fills the Scales; and
   _subḥānAllāh_ and _alḥamdulillāh_ fill whatever is between the heaven and the
   earth; and _Ṣalāh_ is a light; and _Ṣadaqah_ is a clear proof; and _Ṣabr_
   (patience) is a shining light; and the Quran is a proof for or against you.
   Every person starts the day dealing for his own soul so he either sets it
   free or destroys it.”[^11]

10. ʿUthmān BP_HIM said: The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said, “Whoever makes _wuḍū_
    and makes it well, his sins come out from his body, even coming out from
    under his nails.”[^12]

11. Uthmān bin ʿAffān BP_HIM reported that the Prophet said, “He who performs
    _wuḍūʾ_ like this, his previous sins will be forgiven and his _ṣalāh_ and
    walking to the mosque will be considered as supererogatory act of worship.”

----

12. ʿUthmān BP_HIM said: The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said, “Whoever makes _wuḍū_
    like this---then all of his previous sins are forgiven---and his _ṣalāh_ and
    his walking to the masjid are above and beyond that.”[^13]

13. Ibn ‘Umar BP_TWO said: The Emissary of Allāh said, “When one of you makes
    _wuḍū_ and makes it well, then goes out to the masjid---having no purpose
    except _ṣalāh_---then his left foot continues to wipe away his evil deeds
    and his right foot continually writes for him good deeds until he enters the
    masjid. And if the people knew what there was in the night prayer and Subh
    prayers, then they would come to them even if they had to crawl.[^14]

14. Abū Hurayrah BP_HIM said: The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said, “Whoever makes
    _wuḍū_ and makes it well then goes out---and then finds that the people have
    finished the _ṣalāh_---then Allāh gives him the same reward as one who had
    prayed it along with the people without diminishing any of their
    reward.[^15]

15. Zayd ibn Khālid al-Juhanī BP_HIM relates that the Emissary of Allāh BPBUH
    said, “Whoever makes _wuḍū_ and makes it well, then prays two _rakʿahs_ not
    letting his mind wander in them---then Allāh forgives him all of his
    previous sins.”[^16]

16. ʿUqbah ibn ʿĀmir BP_HIM said: The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said,“Whoever
    makes _wuḍū_ and makes it well, then prays two _rakʿahs_ concentrating
    therein with his heart and his face---then Paradise is obligatory for him.”
    [^17]

17. ʿUthmān BP_HIM said: I heard the Emissary of Allāh BPBUH say, “Whoever makes
    _wuḍū_ for _ṣalāh_ and completes the _wuḍū_---then walks to the obligatory
    _ṣalāh_ and prays it with the people---or with the congregation---or in the
    mosque---then Allāh forgives his sins.”[^18]

18. ʿAlī BP_HIM relates that the Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said, “Completing the
    _wuḍū_ when it is a hardship, and walking to the masjid, and waiting for the
    next prayer after the previous one (greatly) washes away the sins.”[^19]

19. Humrān ibn Abān relates that ʿUthmān asked for water to make _wuḍū_---then
    he mentioned how the Emissary of Allāh BPBUH made _wuḍū_. Then he BP_HIM
    said, “The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said at the end of the _ḥadīth_,
    ‘Whoever makes _wuḍū_ in the same way that I have just made _wuḍū_ then
    stands up and prays two _rakʿahs_, not thinking of other things, then his
    previous sins are forgiven.’”[^20]

