

# Nullifiers of wuḍū

## Anything that exits the two private parts

Abū Hurayrah BP_HIM said, “The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said, ‘Allāh does not
accept the prayer of any one of you having committed _ḥadath_ until he makes
_wuḍū_.’” [Al-Bukhārī (_al-Fatḥ_, 1/206) and Muslim (#245)].

68. Al-Nawawī says in _al-Majmūʿ_ (2/3), “...as for that which comes out of the
    two private parts---then it breaks _wuḍū_ according to Allāh's BSWT saying,
    (Aw jaa'a ahadukum min al ghaa'it...) (...or one of you comes from offices
    of nature...) [Soorat-ul-Maa'idah 5:6] along with his BPBUH saying **There
    is no _wuḍū_ except from a sound or a smell.” [_ṣaḥīḥ_ and has preceded
    (_Ṣaḥīḥ al-Jāmiʿ_ (7443)].

    He concludes, “So that which comes out of the front or back part of a man
    or woman breaks the _wuḍū_---whether excretion, urine, or wind---or a worm
    or pus or blood or stones or anything else, and there is no difference in
    that for something which happens normally or rarely.”

## Sound sleep

69. ʿAlī bin ʿAbī Ṭālib BP_HIM said, “The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said, ‘The eye
    is the drawstring for the anus, so he who sleeps then let him make _wuḍū_.’”
    [Abū Dāwūd (#203), Ibn Mājah (#477), and Aḥmad. Declared as _ṣaḥīḥ_ by
    Shaykh al-Albānī].

In the _ḥadīth_ is evidence that sleep does not in itself something that breaks
_wuḍū_, however the _wuḍū_ is nullified if it is possible for something to come
out from the anus. However, if that is restricted, e.g. by sitting flat on the
earth, then that is not the case.

## Becoming unconscious -- other than sleep

That is the intellect going away by any means because of insanity, fainting,
or intoxication---as in this condition he does not know whether his _wuḍū_ is
broken or not. This is the saying of the great majority of scholars. (_Sharḥ
Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim_ (4/74) and _al-Mughnī_ (1/164)).

## Touching the genitals

70. Abū Hurayrah BP_HIM said, “The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said, ‘If one of
you touches his penis and there is no veil between him and it nor any cover,
then _wuḍū_ has become obligatory for him.’” [Al-Ḥākim (1/138) and others.
Shaykh al-Albānī said that it is _ḥadīth ṣaḥīḥ_.]

<!-- TODO Fix the footnotes here -->

71. Busrah BP_HER said, “The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH said, ‘If one of you
touches his penis then let him make _wuḍū_.’” [al-Tirmidhī (1/18) who said it
is _ḥasan ṣaḥīḥ_. It was declared as _ṣaḥīḥ_ by Aḥmad, al-Bukhārī, and Ibn
Maʿīn (_Lumʿāt al-Tanqīḥ Sharḥ Mishkāh al-Maṣābīḥ_, #319). Others also narrate
it as authentic.]

72. Ṭalq ibn ʿAlī BP_HIM said, “The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH was asked about a
man's touching his penis. ‘Should he make _wuḍū_?’ He BPBUH replied, ‘And
isn't it but a part of him?’” [al-Tirmidhī (#85) and he said: And this is the
best of what is reported in this regard]. Shaykh al-Albānī said, “Its _isnād_
is _ṣaḥīḥ_, and this (the view that it doesn't break the _wuḍū_) is
established as being that of a group of the Ṣaḥābah, from them: Ibn Masʿūd,
ʿAmmār bin Yāsir, and because of these, Imam Aḥmad gave the choice between
this and the one before it. Shaykh al-Islām Ibn Taymīyyah harmonized the two
carrying the first to mean if he touched it with desire and this upon the
touching without desire---and there is in this _ḥadīth_ that which gives that
impression and it is his BPBUH saying _a part of him_.” [_al-Mishkāh
al-Maṣābīḥ_, notes on Nos. 319--320.]

## Eating camel meat

73. Jābir bin Samurah BP_HIM narrates that a man asked the Emissary of Allāh
BPBUH, “Should I make _wuḍū_ because of the meat of sheep?” He BPBUH said, “If
you wish make _wuḍū_ and if you wish then do not make _wuḍū_.” He said,
“Should I make _wuḍū_ from the meat of the camel?” He BPBUH said, “Yes, make
_wuḍū_ from the meat of the camel.” He asked, “May I pray in sheep-pens?” He
BPBUH said, “Yes.” He asked, “May I pray in the stalls of camels?” He BPBUH
said, “No.” [Reported by Muslim (1/189)].

## Regarding touching a woman with desire {.unnumbered}

74. A man's touching a woman without desire does not break the _wuḍū_.
ʿĀʾishah BP_HER says, “The Emissary of Allāh BPBUH prayed and I was lying in
front of him as in front of a _janāzah_, so when he wished to prostrate I
pulled up my leg. [al-Bukhārī and Muslim].

75. And in the same way a woman's touching a man without desire does not break
_wuḍū_ as is established from ʿĀʾishah BP_HER, “I didn't find the Prophet
BP_HER one night so I tried to find him with my hand---and my hand fell upon
his feet which were raised up as he was making prostration.” [Muslim (3/203)
and al-Nasāʾī (1/101)].

So we see from these two _ḥadīth_ that merely touching does not break the
_wuḍū_. And Allāh knows best.

The author of _al-Taʿlīqāt al-Salafīyyah ʿalā Sunan al-Nasāʾī_ (1/23) says
concerning _he pushed me with his foot_, “It is well-known that that is a
touching without desire. And so the author uses it as a proof that touching
without desire does not break the _wuḍū_. As for the touching with
desire---its proof is that the _wuḍū_ is not broken until a proof is
established that it does indeed break it---and this is enough of a proof to
show that it doesn't break the _wuḍū_ for the one who holds that view---and
above and beyond that is a further proof that it doesn't break the _wuḍū_ is
the _ḥadīth_ of kissing as kissing is not normally free from touching with
desire.”

The author of _Awn al-Maʿbūd_ (1/69) says regarding her BP_HER saying, _he
kissed me and did not make wuḍū_, “It contains a proof that touching a woman
does not break the _wuḍū_ as kissing is part of touching and the Prophet BPBUH
did not make _wuḍū_ (before praying). And this (that touching a woman even
with desire doesn't break the _wuḍū_) is the saying of ʿAlī, Ibn ʿAbbās, ʿAṭāʾ
bin Ṭāwūs, Abū Ḥanīfah, and Sufyān al-Thawrī. And this _ḥadīth_ is (by itself)
_ḍaʿīf_ but is supported by other narrations, and it is _mursal_. However,
al-Dāraquṭnī connects it. Thus, it is an _ṣaḥīḥ ḥadīth_, _in-shā-Allāh_.” (See
_Naṣb al-Rāyah_, 1/70).

The author of _al-Mughnī_ (1/190) says, “The touching is not in itself
something which breaks _wuḍū_ but breaks _wuḍū_ as it leads to prostatic
fluid or semen being emitted---so the condition which leads to breaking of the
_wuḍū_ is considered---and that is when there is desire.”

_Summary:_ That when a man and woman are safe from anything being emitted
which breaks _wuḍū_---then their _wuḍū_ is not broken; and it is preferable to
be on the safe side, as they may not be safe from such emissions in the
condition of desire. And Allāh BSWT knows best.

